{\rtf0\mac {\colortbl \red0 \green0 \blue0 ;\red255 \green0 \blue0 ;\red0 \green255 \blue0 ;\red0 \green0 \blue255 ;\red0 \green255 \blue255 ;\red255 \green0 \blue255 ;\red255 \green255 \blue0 ;\red255 \green255 \blue255 ;\red128 \green128 \blue128 ;}\deff0 {\fonttbl {\f0 \fnil Geneva;}{\f1 \fnil Skia;}{\f2 \fnil Helvetica;}}{\stylesheet {\s1 \sl320 \tx720 \tx1440 \tx7200 Normal;}{\s2 \sbasedon1 \qc \sl320 \tx720 \tx1440 \tx7200 Header;}}\paperw12240 \paperh15840 \margl1440 \margr1440 \margt0 \margb0 \deftab31680 \ftnbj \sectd \sbknone \headery0 \footery0 {\header \pard \s1 \ri340 \qr \sl240 \tx1440 \tx2160 \tx7200 \tqr \tx9000 \plain \f2 \fs18 \cf8 \i \par \s2 \par \par Ludwig Wittgenstein \bullet  Philosophical Investigations \par }{\footer \pard \s1 \ri340 \qr \sl240 \tx1440 \tx2160 \tx7200 \tqr \tx9000 \plain \f2 \fs18 \cf8 \i \tab    \chpgn /2\par \par \par \par }\pard \s1 \li360 \fi0 \sl320 \tx720 \tx5040 \tx7200 \plain \f1 \fs20  \par           excerpts from PHILOSOPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS\par        \par 1. "When they (my elders) named some object,\par         and accordingly moved towards something, I saw\par         this and I grasped that that the thing was called\par         by the sound they uttered when they meant to\par         point it out.  Their intention was shown by their\par         bodily movements, as it were the natural language\par         of all peoples; the expression of the face, the play\par         of the eyes, the movement of other parts of the\par         body, and the tone of the voice which expresses\par         our state of mind in seeking, having, rejecting, or\par         avoiding something.  Thus, as I heard words\par         repeatedly used in their proper places in various\par         sentences, I gradually learnt to understand what\par         objects they signified; and after I had trained my\par         mouth to form these signs, I used them to express\par         my own desires."\par These words, it seems to me, give us a particular\par         picture of the essence of human language.  It is\par         this: the individual words in language name\par         objects--sentences are combinations of such\par         names.--In this picture of language we find the\par         roots of the following idea: Every word has a\par         meaning.  The meaning is correlated with the\par         word.  It is the object for which the word\par         stands.\par Augustine does not speak of there being any\par         difference between kinds of word.  If you\par         describe the learning of language in this way you\par         are, I believe, thinking primarily of nouns like\par         'table', 'chair', 'bread', and of people's names, and\par         only secondarily of the names of certain actions\par         and properties; and of the remaining kinds of\par         word as something that will take care of itself.\par     Now think of the following use of language: I\par         send someone shopping.  I give him a slip marked\par         'five red apples'.  He takes the slip to the\par         shopkeeper, who opens the drawer marked\par         'apples', then he looks up the word 'red' in a table\par         and finds a colour sample opposite it; then he says\par         the series of cardinal numbers--I assume that he\par         knows them by heart--up to the word 'five' and\par         for each number he takes an apple of the same\par         colour as the sample out of the drawer.--It is in\par         this and simlar ways that one operates with\par         words--"But how does he know where and how\par         he is to look up the word 'red' and what he is to\par         do with the word 'five'?" ---Well, I assume that he\par         'acts' as I have described.  Explanations come to\par         an end somewhere.--But what is the meaning of\par         the word 'five'? --No such thing was in question\par         here, only how the word 'five' is used.\par \par 2.  That philosophical concept of meaning has its\par         place in a primitive idea of the way language\par         functions.  But one can also say  \par         that it is the idea of a language more  \par         primitive than ours.  \par           \par           Let us imagine a language ...The language is\par         meant to serve for communication between a\par         builder A and an assistant B.  A is building with\par         building-stones; there are blocks, pillars, slabs and\par         beams.  B has to pass the stones, and that in the\par         order in which A needs them.  For this purpose\par         they use a language consisting of the words\par         'block', 'pillar', 'slab', 'beam'.  A calls them out; --B\par         brings the stone which he has learnt to bring at\par         such-and-such a call. -- Conceive this as a\par         complete primitive language. \par           \par 3.  Augustine, we might say, does describe a\par        system of communication; only not everything\par        that we call language is this system.  And one has\par        to say this in many cases where the question\par        arises 'Is this an appropriate description or not?' \par        The answer is:  'Yes, it is appropriate, but only for\par        this narrowly circumscribed region, not for the\par        whole of what you were claiming to describe."  \par \par        It is as if someone were to say: "A game consists\par        in moving objects about on a surface according to\par        certain rules..." --and we replied: You seem to be\par        thinking of board games, but there are others. \par        You can make your definition correct by expressly\par        restricting it to those games.            \par \par 122.   A main source of our failure to understand is that we do not 'command a clear view' of the use of our words. \par \par 109 Philosophy is a battle against the bewitchment of our intelligence by means of a language. \par \par         94.\par                  'A proposition is a queer thing!' Here we have in germ the subliming of our whole\par                  account of logic. The tendency to assume a pure intermediary between the\par                  propositional signs and the facts. Or even to try to purify, to sublime, the signs\par                  themselves. -- For our forms of expression prevent us in all sorts of ways from\par                  seeing that nothing out of the ordinary is involved, by sending us in pursuit of\par                  chimeras.\par            95.\par                  "Thought must be something unique." When we say, and mean, that such-and-such\par                  is the case, we -- and our meaning -- do not stop anywhere short of the fact; but\par                  we mean: this -- is -- so. But this paradox (which has the form of a truism) can\par                  also be expressed in this way: Thought can be of what is not the case.\par            96.\par                  Other illusions come from various quarters to attach themselves to the special one\par                  spoken of here. Thought, language, now appear to us as the unique correlate,\par                  picture, of the world. These concepts: proposition, language, thought, world,\par                  stand in line one behind the other, each equivalent to each. (But what are these\par                  words to be used for now? The language-game in which they are to be applied is\par                  missing.)\par            97.\par                  Thought is surrounded by a halo. -- Its essence, logic, presents an order, in fact\par                  the a priori order of the world: that is, the order of possibilities, which must be\par                  common to both world and thought. But this order, it seems, must be utterly\par                  simple. It is prior to all experience, must run through all experience; no empirical\par                  cloudiness or uncertainty can be allowed to affect it. -- It must rather be of the\par                  purest crystal. But this crystal does not appear as an abstraction; but as\par                  something concrete, indeed, as the most concrete -- as it were the hardest thing\par                  there is (Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus No. 5.5563). \par \par                  We are under the illusion that what is peculiar, profound, essential, in our\par                  investigation, resides in its trying to grasp the incomparable essence of language.\par                  That is, the order existing between the concepts of proposition, word, proof,\par                  truth, experience, and so on. This order is a super -- order between -- so to\par                  speak -- super -- concepts. Whereas, of course, if the words "language",\par                  "experience", "world", have a use, it must be as humble a one as that of the words\par                  "table", "lamp", "door".\par            98.\par                  On the one hand it is clear that ever sentence in our language is in order as it is.\par                  That is to say, we are not striving after an ideal, as if our ordinary vague\par                  sentences had not yet got a quite unexceptionable sense, and a perfect language\par                  awaited construction by us. -- On the other hand it seems clear that where there\par                  is sense there must be perfect order. So there must be perfect order even in the\par                  vaguest sentence.\par            99.\par                  The sense of a sentence -- one would like to say -- may, of course, leave this or\par                  that open, but the sentence must nevertheless have a definite sense. An indefinite\par                  sense -- that would really not be a sense at all. -- This is like: An indefinite\par                  boundary is not really a boundary at all. Here one thinks perhaps: if I say "I have\par                  locked the man up fast in the room -- there is only one door left open" -- then I\par                  simply haven't locked him in at all; his being locked in is a sham. One would be\par                  inclined to say here: "You haven't done anything at all". An enclosure with a hole in\par                  it is as good as none. -- But is that true?\par           100.\par                  "But still, it isn't a game, if there is some vagueness in the rules." -- But does this\par                  prevent its being a game? -- "Perhaps you'll call it a game, but at any rate it\par                  certainly isn't a perfect game." This means it has impurities, and what I am\par                  interested in at present is the pure article. -- But I want to say: we misunderstand\par                  the role of the ideal in our language. That is to say: we too should call it a game,\par                  only we are dazzled by the ideal and therefore fail to see clearly the actual use of\par                  the word game.\par           101.\par                  We want to say that there can't be any vagueness in logic. The idea now absorbs\par                  us, that the ideal 'must' be found in reality. Mean while we do not as yet see how\par                  it occurs there, nor do we understand the nature of this "must". We think it must\par                  be in reality: for we think we already see it there.\par           102.\par                  The strict and clear rules of the logical structure of propositions appear to us as\par                  something in the background -- hidden in the medium of the understanding. I\par                  already see them (even though through a medium): for I understand the\par                  propositional sign, I use it to say something.\par           103.\par                  The ideal, as we think of it, is unshakable. You can never get outside it; you must\par                  always turn back. There is no outside; outside you cannot breathe. -- Where does\par                  this idea come from? It is like a pair of glasses on our nose through which we see\par                  whatever we look at. It never occurs to us to take them off.\par           106.\par                  Here it is difficult as it were to keep our heads up, -- to see that we must stick to\par                  the subjects of our everyday thinking, and not go astray and imagine that we have\par                  to describe extreme subtleties, which in turn we are after all quite unable to\par                  describe with the means at our disposal. We feel as if we had to repair a torn\par                  spider's web with our fingers.\par           107.\par                  The more narrowly we examine actual language, the sharper becomes the conflict\par                  between it and our requirement. (For the crystalline purity of logic was, of course,\par                  not a result of investigation: it was a requirement.) The conflict becomes\par                  intolerable; the requirement is now in danger of becoming empty. -- We have got\par                  on to slippery ice where there is no friction and so in a certain sense the\par                  conditions are ideal, but also, just because of that, we are unable to walk. We\par                  want to walk: so we need friction. Back to the rough ground!\par           108.\par                  We see that what we call "sentence" and "language" has not the formal unity that I\par                  imagined, but is the family of structures more or less related to one another. -- But\par                  what becomes of logic now? Its rigor seems to be giving way here. -- But in that\par                  case doesn't logic altogether disappear? -- For how can it lose its rigor? Of course\par                  not by our bargaining any of its rigor out of it. -- The preconceired idea of\par                  crystalline purity can only be removed by turning our whole examination around.\par                  (One might say: the axis of reference of our examination must be rotated, but\par                  about the fixed point of our real need.) \par \par                  The philosophy of logic speaks of sentences and words in exactly the sense in\par                  which we speak of them in ordinary life when we say e.g. "Here is a Chinese\par                  sentence", or "No, that only looks like writing; it is actually just an ornament" and\par                  so on. \par \par                  We are talking about the spatial and temporal phenomenon of language, not about\par                  some non -- spatial, non -- temporal phantasm. [Note in margin: Only it is possible\par                  to be interested in a phenomenon in a variety of ways]. But we talk about it as we\par                  do about the pieces in chess when we are stating the rules of the game, not\par                  describing their physical properties. \par \par                  The question "What is a word really?" is analogous to "What is a piece in chess?"\par           109.\par                  It was true to say that our considerations could not be scientific ones. It was not\par                  of any possible interest to us to find out empirically that, contrary to our\par                  preconceived ideas, it is possible to think such-and-such -- whatever that may\par                  mean. (The conception of thought as a gaseous medium.) And we may not advance\par                  any kind of theory. There must not be anything hypothetical in our considerations.\par                  We must do away with all explanation, and description alone must take its place.\par                  And this description gets its light, that is to say its purpose, from the philosophical\par                  problems. These are, of course, not empirical problems, they are solved, rather,\par                  by looking into the workings of our language, and that in such a way as to make us\par                  recognize those workings: in despite of an urge to misunderstand them. The\par                  problems are solved, not by giving new information, but by arranging what we have\par                  always known. Philosophy is a battle against the bewitchment of our intelligence by\par                  means of language.\par           110.\par                  Language (or thought?) is something unique" -- this proves to be a superstition\par                  (not a mistake!), itself produced by grammatical illusions. \par \par                  And now the impressiveness retreats to these illusions, to the problems.\par           111.\par                  The problems arising through a misinterpretation of our forms of language have\par                  the character of depth. They are deep disquietudes; their roots are as deep in\par                  us as the forms of our language and their significance is as great as the\par                  importance of our language. Let us ask ourselves: why do we feel a grammatical\par                  joke to be deep? (And that is what the depth of philosophy is.)\par           112.\par                  A simile that has been absorbed into the forms of our language produces a false\par                  appearance, and this disquiets us. "But this isn't how it is!" -- we say. "Yet this is\par                  how it has to be!"\par           113.\par                  "But this is how it is --" I say to myself over and over again. I feel as though, if\par                  only I could fix my gaze absolutely sharply on this fact, get it in focus, I must grasp\par                  the essence of the matter.\par           114.\par                  (Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, 4.5): "The general form of propositions is: This is\par                  how things are." That is the kind of proposition that one repeats to oneself\par                  countless times. One thinks that one is tracing the outline of the thing's nature\par                  over and over again, and one is merely tracing round the frame through which we\par                  look at it.\par           115.\par                  A picture held us captive. And we could not get outside it, for it lay in our\par                  language and language seemed to repeat it to us inexorably.\par           116.\par                  When philosophers use a word -- "knowledge", "being", "object", "I", "proposition",\par                  "name" -- and try to grasp the essence of the thing, one must always ask oneself:\par                  is the word ever actually used in this way in the language which is its original\par                  home? -- \par \par                  What we do is to bring words back from their metaphysical to their everyday use.\par           117.\par                  You say to me: "You understand this expression, don't you? Well then -- I am using\par                  it in the sense you are familiar with." -- As if the sense were an atmosphere\par                  accompanying the word, which it carried with it into every kind of application. \par \par                  If, for example, someone says that the sentence "This is here" (saying which he\par                  points to an object in front of him) makes sense to him then he should ask himself\par                  in what special circumstances this sentence is actually used. There it does make\par                  sense.\par           118.\par                  Where does our investigation get its importance from, since it seems only to\par                  destroy everything interesting, that is, all that is great and important? (As it were\par                  all the buildings, leaving behind only bits of stone and rubble.) What we are\par                  destroying is nothing but houses of cards and we are clearing up the ground of\par                  language on which they stand.\par           119.\par                  The results of philosophy are the uncovering of one or another piece of plain\par                  nonsense and of bumps that the understanding has got by running its head up\par                  against the limits of language. These bumps make us see the value of the\par                  discovery.\par           120.\par                  When I talk about language (words, sentences, etc.) I must speak the language of\par                  every day. Is this language somehow too coarse and material for what we want to\par                  say? Then how is another one to be constructed? -- And how strange that we\par                  should be able to do anything at all with the one we travel \par \par                  In giving explanations I already have to use language full -- blown (not some sort of\par                  preparatory, provisional one); this by itself shows that I can adduce only exterior\par                  facts about language. \par \par                  Yes, but then how can these explanations satisfy us? -- Well, your very questions\par                  were framed in this language; they had to be expressed in this language, if there\par                  was anything to ask! \par \par                  And your scruples are misunderstandings. \par \par                  Your questions refer to words; so I have to talk about words. \par \par                  You say: the point isn't the word, but its meaning, and you think of the meaning as\par                  a thing of the same kind as the word, though also different from the word. Here\par                  the word, there the meaning. The money, and the cow that you can buy with it.\par                  (But contrast: money, and its use.)\par           121.\par                  One might think: if philosophy speaks of the use of the word "philosophy" there\par                  must be a second -- order philosophy. But it is not so: it is, rather, like the case of\par                  orthography, which deals with the word "orthography" among others without then\par                  being second -- order.\par           122.\par                  A main source of our failure to understand is that we do not command a clear\par                  view of the use of our words. -- Our grammar is lacking in just this sort of\par                  perspicuity. A perspicuous representation produces just that understanding which\par                  consists in 'seeing connections'. Hence the importance of finding and inventing\par                  intermediate cases. \par \par                  The concept of a perspicuous representation is of fundamental significance for us.\par                  It earmarks the form of account we give, the way we look at things. (Is this a\par                  'Weltanschauung'?)\par           123.\par                  A philosophical problem has the form: "I don't know my way around."\par           124.\par                  Philosophy may in no way interfere with the actual use of language, it can in the\par                  end only describe it. \par \par                  For it cannot give it any foundation either. \par \par                  It leaves everything as it is. \par \par                  It also leaves mathematics as it is, and no mathematical discovery can advance it. A\par                  "leading problem of mathematical logic" is for us a problem of mathematics like any\par                  other.\par           125.\par                  It is the business of philosophy, not to resolve a contradiction by means of a\par                  mathematical or logico -- mathematical discovery, but to make it possible for us to\par                  get a clear view of the state of mathematics that troubles us: the state of affairs\par                  before the contradiction is resolved. (And this does not mean that one is\par                  sidestepping a difficulty.) \par \par                  The fundamental fact here is that we lay down rules, a technique, for a game, and\par                  that then when we follow the rules, things do not turn out as we had assumed.\par                  That we are therefore as it were entangled in our own rules. \par \par                  This entanglement in our rules is what we want to understand (i.e. get a clear view\par                  of). \par \par                  It throws light on our concept of meaning something. For in those cases things\par                  turn out otherwise than we had meant, foreseen. That is just what we say when,\par                  for example, a contradiction appears: "I didn't mean it like that." \par \par                  The civil status of a contradiction, or its status in civil life: there is the\par                  philosophical problem.\par           126.\par                  Philosophy simply puts everything before us, and neither explains nor deduces\par                  anything. -- Since everything 1les open to view there is nothing to explain. For\par                  what is hidden, for example, is of no interest to us. \par \par                  One might also give the name "philosophy" to what is possible before all new\par                  discoveries and inventions.\par           127.\par                  The work of the philosopher consists in assembling reminders for a particular\par                  purpose.\par           128.\par                  If one tried to advance theses in philosophy, it would never be possible to\par                  debate them, because everyone would agree to them.\par           129.\par                  The aspects of things that are most important for us are hidden because of their\par                  simplicity and familiarity. (One is unable to notice something -- because it is always\par                  before one's eyes.) The real foundations of his inquiry do not strike a man at all.\par                  Unless that fact has at some time struck him. -- And this means: we fail to be\par                  struck by what, once seen, is most striking and most powerful.\par           130.\par                  Our clear and simple language-games are not preparatory studies for a future\par                  regularization of language -- as it were first approximations, ignoring friction and air\par                  -- resistance. The language-games are rather set up as objects of comparison\par                  which are meant to throw light on the facts of our 1anguage by way not only of\par                  similarities, but also of dissimilarities.\par           131.\par                  For we can avoid ineptness or emptiness in our assertions only by presenting the\par                  model as what it is, as an object of comparison -- as, so to speak, a measuring --\par                  rod; not as a preconceived idea to which reality must correspond. (The\par                  dogmatism into which we fall so easily in doing philosophy.)\par           132.\par                  We want to establish an order in our knowledge of the use of language: an order\par                  with a particular end in view, one out of many possible orders; not the order. To\par                  this end we shall constantly be giving prominence to distinctions which our\par                  ordinary forms of language easily make us overlook. This may make it look as if we\par                  saw it as our task to reform language. \par \par                  Such a reform for particular practical purposes, an improvement in our terminology\par                  designed to prevent misunderstandings in practice, is perfectly possible. But\par                  these are not the cases we have to do with. The confusions which occupy us arise\par                  when language is like an engine idling, not when it is doing work.\par           133.\par                  It is not our aim to refine or complete the system of rules for the use of our words\par                  in unheard-of ways. \par \par                  For the clarity that we are aiming at is indeed complete clarity But this simply\par                  means that the philosophical problems should completely disappear. \par \par                  The read discovery is the one that makes me capable of stopping doing\par                  philosophy when I want to. -- The one that gives philosophy peace, so that it is no\par                  longer tormented by questions which bring in question. -- Instead, we now\par                  demonstrate a method, by examples; and the series of examples can be broken\par                  off. -- Problems are solved (difficulties eliminated), not a single problem. \par \par                  There is not a philosophical method, though there are indeed methods, like\par                  different therapies.\par           134.\par                  Let us examine the proposition: "This is how things are." -- How can I say that this\par                  is the general form of propositions? -- It is first and foremost itself a proposition,\par                  an English sentence, for it has a subject and a predicate. But how is this sentence\par                  applied -- that is, in our everyday language? For I got it from there and nowhere\par                  else. \par \par                  We may say' e.g.: "He explained his position to me, said that this was how things\par                  were, and that therefore he needed an advance". So far, then, one can say that\par                  that sentence stands for any statement It is employed as a propositional schema,\par                  but on) because it has the construction of an English sentence. It would be\par                  possible to say instead "such and such is the case", "this is the situation", and so\par                  on. It would also be possible here simply to use a letter, a variable, as in symbolic\par                  logic. But no one is going to call the letter "p" the general form of propositions. To\par                  repeat: "This is how things are" had that position only because it is itself what one\par                  calls an English sentence. But though it is a proposition, still it gets employed as a\par                  propositional variable. To say that this proposition agrees (or does not agree)\par                  with reality would be obvious nonsense. Thus it illustrates the fact that one\par                  feature of our concept of a proposition is, sounding like a proposition.\par           135.\par                  But haven't we got a concept of what a proposition is, of what we take\par                  "proposition" to mean? -- Yes; just as we also have a concept of what we mean by\par                  "game". Asked what a proposition is -- whether it is another person or ourselves\par                  that we have to answer -- we shall give examples and these will include what one\par                  may call inductively defined series of propositions. This is the kind of way in which\par                  we have such a concept as proposition'. (Compare the concept of a proposition\par                  with the concept of number.)\par           136.\par                  At bottom, giving "This is how things are" as the general form of propositions is\par                  the same as giving the definition: a proposition is whatever can be true or false.\par                  For instead of "This is how things are" I could have said "This is true". (Or again\par                  "This is false".) But we have \par \par                  'p' is true = p\par                  'p' is false = not-p. \par \par                  And to say that a proposition is whatever can be true or false amounts to saying:\par                  we call something a proposition when in our language we apply the calculus of\par                  truth functions to it. \par \par                  Now it looks as if the definition -- a proposition is whatever can be true or false --\par                  determined what a proposition was, by saying: what fits the concept 'true', or\par                  what the concept 'true' fits, is a proposition. So it is as if we had a concept of true\par                  and false, which we could use to determine what is and what is not a proposition.\par                  What engages with the concept of truth (as with a cogwheel) is a proposition. \par \par                  But this is a bad picture. It is as if one were to say "The king in chess is the piece\par                  that one can check." But this can mean no more than that in our game of chess we\par                  only check the king. Just as the proposition that only a proposition can be true\par                  or false can say no more than that we only predicate "true" and "false" of what we\par                  call a proposition. And what a proposition is is in one sense determined by the\par                  rules of sentence formation (in English for example), and in another sense by the\par                  use of the sign in the language-game. And the use of the words "true" and "false"\par                  may be among the constituent parts of this v game; and if so it belongs to our\par                  concept 'Proposition' but does not AS we might also say, check belongs to our\par                  concept of the king in chess (as so to speak a constituent part of it). To say that\par                  check did not it our concept of the pawns, would mean that a game in which pawns\par                  were checked, in which, say, the players who lost their pawns lost, would be\par                  uninteresting or stupid or too complicated or something of the kind.\par           137.\par                  What about learning to determine the subject of a sentence by means of the\par                  question "Who or what ....?" -- Here, surely, there is such a thing as the subject's\par                  'fitting' this question; for otherwise how should we find out what the subject was\par                  by means of the question? We find it out much as we find out which letter of the\par                  alphabet comes after 'K' by saying the alphabet up to 'K' to ourselves. Now in what\par                  sense does 'L' fit on to this series of letters? -- In that sense "true" and "false"\par                  could be said to fit propositions; and a child might be taught to distinguish\par                  between propositions and other expressions by being told "Ask yourself if you can\par                  say 'is true' after it. If these words fit it's a proposition." (And in the same way one\par                  might have said: Ask yourself if you can put the words "This is how things are:" in\par                  front of it.)\par           138.\par                  But can't the meaning of a word that I understand fit the sense of a sentence that\par                  I understand? Or the meaning of one word fit the meaning of another? Of course, if\par                  the meaning is the use we make of the word, it makes no sense to speak of such\par                  'fitting'. But we understand the meaning of a word when we hear or say it; we\par                  grasp it in a flash, and what we grasp in this way is surely something different from\par                  the use which is extended in time!\par                                                       . . .\par           239.\par                  How is he to know what color he is to pick out when he hears "red"? -- Quite\par                  simple: he is to take the color whose image occurs to him when he hears the\par                  word. -- But how is he to know which color it is 'whose image occurs to him'? Is a\par                  further criterion needed for that? (There is indeed such a procedure as choosing\par                  the color which occurs to one when one hears the word "....") \par \par                  "'Red' means the color that occurs to me when I hear the word 'red'" -- would be a\par                  definition. Not an explanation of what it is to use a word as a name.\par           240.\par                  Disputes do not break out (among mathematicians, say) over the question whether\par                  a rule has been obeyed or not. People don't come to blows over it, for example.\par                  That is part of the framework on which the working of our language is based (for\par                  example, in giving descriptions).\par           241.\par                  "So you are saying that human agreement decides what is true and what is false?"\par                  -- It is what human beings say that is true and false, and they agree in the\par                  language they use. That is not agreement in opinions but in form of life.\par           242.\par                  If language is to be a means of communication there must be agreement not only in\par                  definitions but also (queer as this may sound) in judgments. This seems to abolish\par                  logic, but does not do so. -- It is one thing to describe methods of measurement,\par                  and another to obtain and state results of measurement. But what we call\par                  "measuring" is partly determined by a certain constancy in results of measurement.\par           243.\par                  A human being can encourage himself, give himself orders, obey, blame and punish\par                  himself, he can ask himself a question and answer it. We could even imagine human\par                  beings who spoke only in monologue; who accompanied their activities by talking\par                  to themselves. -- An explorer who watched them and listened to their talk might\par                  succeed in translating their language into ours. (This would enable him to predict\par                  these people's actions correctly, for he also hears them making resolutions and\par                  decisions.) \par \par                  But could we also imagine a language in which a person could write down or give\par                  vocal expression to his inner experiences -- his feelings, moods, and the rest -- for\par                  his private use? Well, can't we do so in our ordinary language? -- But that is not\par                  what I mean. The individual words of this language are to refer to what can only be\par                  known to the person speaking; to his immediate private sensations. So another\par                  person cannot understand the language.\par           244.\par                  How do words refer to sensations? -- There doesn't seem to be any problem\par                  here; don't we talk about sensations every day, and give them names? But how is\par                  the connection between the name and the thing named set up? This question is\par                  the same as: how does a human being learn the meaning of the names of\par                  sensations? -- of the word "pain" for example. Here is one possibility: words are\par                  connected with the primitive, the natural, expressions of the sensation and used in\par                  their place. A child has hurt himself and he cries; and then adults talk to him and\par                  teach him exclamations and, later, sentences. They teach the child new pain --\par                  behavior. \par \par                  "So you are saying that the word 'pain' really means crying?" -- On the contrary:\par                  the verbal expression of pain replaces crying and does not describe it.\par           245.\par                  For how can I go so far as to try to use language to get between pain and its\par                  expression?\par           246.\par                  In what sense are my sensations private? -- Well, only I can know whether I am\par                  really in pain; another person can only surmise it. -- In one way this is wrong, and in\par                  another nonsense. If we are using the word "to know" as it is normally used (and\par                  how else are we to use it?), then other people very often know when I am in pain.\par                  -- Yes, but all the same not with the certainty with which I know it myself! -- It can't\par                  be said of me at all (except perhaps as a joke) that I now I am in pain. What is it\par                  supposed to mean -- except perhaps that I am in pain? \par \par                  Other people cannot be said to learn of my sensations only from my behavior -- for\par                  I cannot be said to learn of them. I have them. \par \par                  The truth is: it makes sense to say about other people that they doubt whether I\par                  am in pain; but not to say it about myself.\par           247.\par                  "Only you can know if you had that intention." One might tell someone this when\par                  one was explaining the meaning of the word "intention" to him. For then it means:\par                  that is how we use it. \par \par                  (And here "know', means that the expression of uncertainty is senseless.)\par           248.\par                  The proposition "Sensations are private" is comparable to; "One plays patience by\par                  oneself".\par           249.\par                  Are we perhaps over -- hasty in our assumption that the smile of an unweaned\par                  infant is not a presence? -- And on what experience is our assumption based? \par \par                  (Lying is a language-game that needs to be learned like any other one.)\par           250.\par                  Why can't a dog simulate pain? Is he too honest? Could one teach a dog to\par                  simulate pain? Perhaps it is possible to teach him to howl on particular occasions\par                  as if he were in pain, even when he is not. But the surroundings which are\par                  necessary for this behavior to be real simulation are missing.\par           251.\par                  What does it mean when we say: "I can't imagine the opposite of this" or "What\par                  would it be like, if it were otherwise?" -- For example, when someone has said that\par                  my images are private, or that only I myself can know whether I am feeling pain,\par                  and similar things. \par \par                  Of course, here "I can't imagine the opposite" doesn't mean: my powers of\par                  imagination are unequal to the task. These words are a defense against something'\par                  whose form makes it look like an empirical proposition, but which is really a\par                  grammatical one. \par \par                  But why do we say: "I can't imagine the opposite"? Why not: "I can't imagine the\par                  thing itself"? \par \par                  Example: "Every rod has a length." That means something like: we call something\par                  (or this) "the length of a rod" -- but nothing "the length of a sphere." Now can I\par                  imagine 'every rod having a length'? Well, I simply imagine a rod. Only this picture, in\par                  connection with this proposition, has a quite different role from one used in\par                  connection with the proposition "This table has the same length as the one over\par                  there". For here I understand what it means to have a picture of the opposite (nor\par                  need it be a mental picture). \par \par                  But the picture attaching to the grammatical proposition could only show, say,\par                  what is called "the length of a rod". And what should the opposite picture be ? \par \par                  (Remark about the negation of an a priori proposition.)\par           252.\par                  "This body has extension." To this we might reply: "Nonsense!" -- but are inclined\par                  to reply "Of course!" Why is this?\par           253.\par                  "Another person can't have my pains." -- Which are my pains? What counts as a\par                  criterion of identity here? Consider what makes it possible in the case of physical\par                  objects to speak of "two exactly the same", for example, to say "This chair is not\par                  the one you saw here yesterday, but is exactly the same as it". \par \par                  In so far as it makes sense to say that my pain is the same as his, it is also\par                  possible for us both to have the same pain. (And it would a]so be imaginable for\par                  two people to feel pain in the same -- not just the corresponding -- place. That\par                  might be the case with Siamese twins, for instance.) \par \par                  I have seen a person in a discussion on this subject strike himself on the breast\par                  and say: "But surely another person can't have THIS pain!" -- The answer to this is\par                  that one does not define a criterion of identity by emphatic stressing of the word\par                  "this". Rather, what the emphasis does is to suggest the case in which we are\par                  familiar with such a criterion of identity, but have to be reminded of it.\par           254.\par                  The substitution of "identical" for "the same" (for instance) is another typical\par                  expedient in philosophy. As if we were talking about shades of meaning and all that\par                  were in question were to find words to hit on the correct nuance. That is in\par                  question in philosophy only where we have to give a psychologically exact account\par                  of the temptation to use a particular kind of expression. What we 'are tempted to\par                  say' in such a case is, of course, not philosophy; but it is its raw material. Thus, for\par                  example, what a mathematician is inclined to say about the objectivity and reality\par                  of mathematical facts, is not a philosophy of mathematics, but something for\par                  philosophical treatment.\par           255.\par                  The philosopher treats a question; like an illness.\par           256.\par                  Now, what about the language which describes my inner experiences and which\par                  only I myself can understand? How do I use words to stand for my sensations? --\par                  As we ordinarily do? Then are my words for sensations tied up with my natural\par                  expressions of sensation? In that case my language is not a 'private' one. Someone\par                  else might understand it as well as I. -- But suppose I didn't have any natural\par                  expression for the sensation, but only had the sensation? And now I simply\par                  associate names with sensations and use these names in descriptions.\par           257.\par                  "What would it be like if human beings showed no outward signs of pain (did not\par                  groan, grimace, etc.)? Then it would be impossible to teach a child the use of the\par                  word 'tooth -- ache'." -- Well, let's assume the child is a genius and itself invents a\par                  name for the sensation! -- But then, of course, he couldn't make himself\par                  understood when he used the word. -- So does he understand the name, without\par                  being able to explain its meaning to anyone? -- But what does it mean to say that\par                  he has 'named his pain'? -- How has he done this naming of pain?! And whatever he\par                  did, what was its purpose? -- When one says "He gave a name to his sensation"\par                  one forgets that a great deal of stage -- setting in the language is presupposed if\par                  the mere act of naming is to make sense. And when we speak of someone's having\par                  given a name to pain, what is presupposed is the existence of the grammar of the\par                  word "pain"; it shows the post where the new word is stationed.\par           258.\par                  Let us imagine the following case. I want to keep a diary about the recurrence of a\par                  certain sensation. \par \par                  To this end I associate it with the sign "S" and write this sign in a calendar for\par                  every day on which I have the sensation. I will remark first of all that a definition of\par                  the sign cannot be formulated. -- But still I can give myself a kind of ostensive\par                  definition. -- How? Can I point to the sensation? Not in the ordinary sense. But I\par                  speak, or write the sign down, and at the same time I concentrate my attention on\par                  the sensation -- and so, as it were, point to it inwardly. -- But what is this\par                  ceremony for? for that is all it seems to be! A definition surely serves to establish\par                  the meaning of a sign. -- Well, that is done precisely by the concentrating of my\par                  attention; for in this way I impress on myself the connection between the sign and\par                  the sensation. -- But "I impress it on myself" can only mean: this process brings it\par                  about that I remember the connection right in the future. But in the present case I\par                  have no criterion of correctness. One would like to say: whatever is going to seem\par                  right to me is right. And that only means that here we can't talk about 'right'.\par           259.\par                  Are the rules of the private language impressions of rules? -- The balance on\par                  which impressions are weighed is not the impression of a balance.\par           260.\par                  "Well, I believe that this is the sensation S again." -- Perhaps you believe that you\par                  believe it! \par \par                  Then did the man who made the entry in the calendar make a note of nothing\par                  whatever? -- Don't consider it a matter of course that a person is making a note\par                  of something when he makes a mark -- say in a calendar. For a note has a function,\par                  and this "S" so far has none. \par \par                  (One can talk to oneself. -- If a person speaks when no one else is present, does\par                  that mean he is speaking to himself?)\par           261.\par                  What reason have we for calling "S" the sign for a sensation? For "sensation" is a\par                  word of our common language. not of one intelligible to me alone. So the use of\par                  this word stands in need of a justification which everybody understands. -- And it\par                  would not help either to say that it need not be a sensation; that when he writes\par                  "S", he has something -- and that is all that can be said. "Has" and "something" also\par                  belong to our common language. -- So in the end when one is doing philosophy one\par                  gets to the point where one would like just to emit an inarticulate sound. -- But\par                  such a sound is an expression only as it occurs in a particular language-game,\par                  which should now be described.\par           262.\par                  It might be said: if you have given yourself a private definition of a word, then you\par                  must inwardly undertake to use the word in such-and-such a way. And how do you\par                  undertake that? Is it to be assumed that you invent the technique of using the\par                  word; or that you found it ready -- made?\par           263.\par                  "But I can (inwardly) undertake to call THIS 'pain' in the future." -- "But is it certain\par                  that you have undertaken it? Are you sure that it was enough for this purpose to\par                  concentrate your attention on your feeling?" -- A queer question. -- \par           264.\par                  "Once you know what the word stands for, you understand it, you know its whole\par                  use."\par           265.\par                  Let us imagine a table (something like a dictionary) that exists only in our\par                  imagination. A dictionary can be used to justify the translation of a word X by a\par                  word Y. But are we also to call it a justification if such a table is to be looked up\par                  only in the imagination? -- "Well, yes; then it is a subjective justification." -- But\par                  justification consists in appealing to something independent. -- "But surely I can\par                  appeal from one memory to another. For example, I don't know if I nave\par                  remembered the time of departure of a train right and to check it I call to mind\par                  how a page of the time -- table looked. Isn't it the same here?" -- No; for this\par                  process has got to produce a memory which is actually correct. If the mental\par                  image of the time -- table could not itself be tested for correctness, how could it\par                  confirm the correctness of the first memory? (As if someone were to buy several\par                  copies of the morning paper to assure himself that what it said was true.) \par \par                  Looking up a table in the imagination is no more looking up a table than the image\par                  of the result of an imagined experiment is the result of an experiment.\par           266.\par                  I can look at the clock to see what time it is: but I can also look at the dial of a\par                  clock in order to "Mess what time it is; or for the same purpose move the hand of\par                  a clock till its position strikes me as right. So the look of a clock may serve to\par                  determine the time in more than one way. "Looking at the clock in imagination.)\par           267.\par                  Suppose I wanted to justify the choice of dimensions for a bridge which I imagine\par                  to be building, by making loading tests on the material of the bridge in my\par                  imagination. This would, of course, be to imagine what is called justifying the choice\par                  of dimensions for a bridge. But should we also call it justifying an imagined choice\par                  of dimensions?\par           268.\par                  Why can't my right hand give my left hand money? -- My right hand can put it into\par                  my left hand. My right hand can write a deed of gift and my left hand a receipt. --\par                  But the further practical consequences would not be those of a gift. When the left\par                  hand has taken the money from the right, etc., we shall ask: "Well, and what of it?"\par                  And the same could be asked if a person had given himself a private definition of a\par                  word; I mean, if he has said the word to himself and at the same time has directed\par                  his attention to a sensation.\par           269.\par                  Let us remember that there are certain criteria in a man's behavior for the fact\par                  that he does not understand a word: that it means nothing to him, that he can do\par                  nothing with it. And criteria for his 'thinking he understands', attaching some\par                  meaning to the word, but not the right one. And, lastly, criteria for his\par                  understanding the word right. In the second case one might speak of a subjective\par                  understanding. And sounds which no one else understands but which I 'appear to\par                  understand' might be called a "private language".\par           270.\par                  Let us now imagine a use for the entry of the sign "S" in my diary. I discover that\par                  whenever I have a particular sensation a manometer shows that my blood --\par                  pressure rises. So I shall be able to say that my blood -- pressure is rising without\par                  using any apparatus. This is a useful result. And now it seems quite indifferent\par                  whether I have recognized the sensation right or not. Let us suppose I regularly\par                  identify it wrong, it does not matter in the least. And that alone shows he turned a\par                  knob which looked as if it could be used to turn on some part of the machine; but\par                  it was a mere ornament, not connected with the mechanism at all.) \par \par                  And what is our reason for calling "S" the name of a sensation here? Perhaps the\par                  kind of way this sign is employed in this language-game. -- And why a "particular\par                  sensation," that is, the same one every time? Well, aren't we supposing that we\par                  write "S" every time?\par           271.\par                  "Imagine a person whose memory could not retain what the word 'pain' meant --\par                  so that he constantly called different things by that name -- but nevertheless used\par                  the word in a way fitting in with the usual symptoms and presuppositions of pain" --\par                  in short he uses it as we all do. Here I should like to say: a wheel that can be\par                  turned though nothing else moves with it, is not part of the mechanism.\par           272.\par                  The essential thing about private experience is really not that each person\par                  possesses his own exemplar, but that nobody knows whether other people also\par                  have this or something else. The assumption would thus be possible -- though\par                  unverifiable -- that one section of mankind had one sensation of red and another\par                  section another.\par           273.\par                  What am I to say about the word "red"? -- that it means something 'confronting us\par                  all' and that everyone should really have another word, besides this one, to mean\par                  his own sensation of red? Or is it like this: the word "red" means something\par                  known to everyone; and in addition, for each person, it means something known\par                  only to him? (Or perhaps rather: it refers to something known only to him.)\par           274.\par                  Of course, saying that the word "red" "refers to" instead of "means" something\par                  private does not help us in the least to grasp its function; but it is the more\par                  psychologically apt expression for a particular experience in doing philosophy. It is\par                  as if when I uttered the word I cast a sidelong glance at the private sensation, as\par                  it were in order to say to myself: I know all right what I mean by it.\par           275.\par                  Look at the blue of the sky and say to yourself "How blue the sky is!" -- When you\par                  do it spontaneously -- without philosophical intentions -- the idea never crosses\par                  your mind that this impression of color belongs only to you. And you have no\par                  hesitation in exclaiming that to someone else. And if you point at anything as you\par                  say the words you point at the sky. I am saying: you have not the feeling of\par                  pointing -- into -- yourself which often accompanies 'naming the sensation' when\par                  one is thinking about 'private language'. Nor do you think that really you ought not\par                  to point to the color with your hand, but with your attention. (Consider what it\par                  means "to point to something with the attention".)\par           276.\par                  But don't we at least mean something: quite definite when we look at a color and\par                  name our color -- impression? It is as if we detached the color -- impression from\par                  the object, like a membrane. (This ought to arouse our suspicions.)\par           277.\par                  But how is even possible for us to be tempted to think that we use a word to\par                  mean at one time the color known to everyone -- and at another the 'visual\par                  impression' which I am getting now? How can there be so much as a temptation\par                  here? I don't turn the same kind of attention on the color in the two cases. When I\par                  mean the color impression that (as I should like to say) belongs to me alone I\par                  immerse myself in the color -- rather like when I 'cannot get my fill of a color'.\par                  Hence it is easier to produce this experience when one is looking at a bright color,\par                  or at an impressive color -- scheme.\par           278.\par                  "I know how the color green looks to me" -- surely that makes sense! -- Certainly:\par                  what use of the proposition are you thinking of?\par           279.\par                  Imagine someone saying: "But I know how tall I am!" and laying his hand on top of\par                  his head to prove it.\par           280.\par                  Someone paints a picture in order to show how he imagines a theater scene. And\par                  now I say: "This picture has a double function: it informs others, as pictures or\par                  words inform but for the one who gives the information it is a representation (or\par                  piece of information?) of another kind: for him it is the picture of his image, as it\par                  can't be for anyone else. To him his private impression of the picture means what\par                  he has imagined, in a sense in which the picture cannot mean this to others." -- And\par                  what right have I to speak in this second case of a representation or piece of\par                  information -- if these words were rightly used in the first case?\par           281.\par                  "But doesn't what you say come to this: that there is no pain, for example, without\par                  pain -- behavior?" -- It comes to this: only of a living human being and what\par                  resembles (behaves like) a living human being can one say it has sensations; it\par                  sees: is blind; hears; is deaf; is conscious or unconscious.\par           282.\par                  "But in a fairy tale the pot too can see and hear!" (Certainly; but it can also talk.) \par \par                  "But the fairy tale only invents what is not the case: it does not talk nonsense." --\par                  It is not as simple as that. Is it false or nonsensical to say that a pot talks? Have\par                  we a clear picture of the circumstances in which we should say of a pot that it\par                  talked? (Even a nonsense -- poem is not nonsense in the same way as the\par                  babbling of a child.) \par \par                  We do indeed say of an inanimate thing that it is in pain: when playing with dolls for\par                  example. But this use of the concept of pain is a secondary one. Imagine a case in\par                  which people ascribed pain only to inanimate things; pitied only dolls I (When\par                  children play at trains their game is connected with their knowledge of trains. ]t\par                  would nevertheless be possible for the children of a tribe unacquainted with trains\par                  to learn this game from others, and to play it without knowing that it was copied\par                  from anything. One might say that the game did not make the same sense to them\par                  as to us.)\par           283.\par                  What gives us so much as the idea that living beings, things, can feel? \par \par                  Is it that my education has led me to it by drawing my attention to feeling in myself,\par                  and now I transfer the idea to objects outside myself? That I recognize that there\par                  is something there (in me) which I can call "pain" without getting into conflict with\par                  the way other people use this word? -- I do not transfer my idea to stones, plants,\par                  etc. \par \par                  Couldn't I imagine having frightful pains and turning to stone while they lasted?\par                  Well, how do I know, if I shut my eyes, whether I have not turned into a stone? And\par                  if that has happened, in what sense will the stone have the pains? In what sense\par                  will they be ascribable to the stone? And why need the pain have a bearer at all\par                  here?! \par \par                  And can one say of the stone that it has a soul and that is what has the pain?\par                  What has a soul, or pain, to do with a stone? \par \par                  Only of what behaves like a human being can one say that it has pains. \par \par                  For one has to say it of a body, or, if you like of a soul which some body had. And\par                  how can a body have a soul?\par           284.\par                  Look at a stone and imagine it having sensations. -- One says to oneself: How\par                  could one so much as get the idea of ascribing a sensation to a thing? One\par                  might as well ascribe it to a number! -- And now look at a wriggling fly and at once\par                  these difficulties vanish and pain seems able to get a foothold here, where before\par                  everything was, so to speak, too smooth for it. \par \par                  And so, too, a corpse seems to us quite inaccessible to pain. -- Our attitude to\par                  what is alive and to what is dead, is not the same. All our reactions are different. --\par                  If anyone says: "That cannot simply come from the fact that a living thing moves\par                  about in such-and-such a way and a dead one not", then I want to intimate to him\par                  that this is a case of the transition 'from quantity to quality'.\par           285.\par                  Think of the recognition of farial expressions. Or of the description of facial\par                  expressions -- which does not consist in giving the measurements of the face!\par                  Think, too, how one can imitate a man's face without seeing one's own in a mirror.\par           286.\par                  But isn't it absurd to say of a body that it has pain? And why does one feel an\par                  absurdity in that? In what sense is it true that my hand does not feel pain, but I in\par                  my hand? \par \par                  What sort of issue is: Is it the body that feels pain? -- How is it to be decided?\par                  What makes it plausible to say that it is not the body? -- \par \par                  Well, something like this: if someone has a pain in his hand, then the hand does not\par                  say so (unless it writes it) and one does not comfort the hand, but the sufferer:\par                  one looks into his face.\par           287.\par                  How am I filled with pity for this man? How does it come out what the object of\par                  my pity is? (Pity, one may say, is a form of conviction that someone else is in pain.)\par           288.\par                  I turn to stone and my pain goes on. -- Suppose I were m error and it was no\par                  longer pain? -- But I can't be in error here; it means nothing to doubt whether I\par                  am in pain! -- That means: f anyone said "I do not know if what I have is a pain or\par                  something else", we should think something like, he does not know what the\par                  English word "pain" means: and we should explain it to him. -- How? Perhaps by\par                  means of gestures, or by pricking him with a pin and saying: "See, that's what pain\par                  is!" This explanation, like any other, he might understand right, wrong, or not at all.\par                  And he will show which he does by his use of the word, in this as in other cases. \par \par                  If he now said, for example: "Oh, I know what 'pain' means; what I don't know is\par                  whether this, that I have now, is pain" -- we should merely shake our heads and\par                  be forced to regard his words as a queer reaction which we have no idea what to\par                  do with. (It would be rather as if we heard someone say seriously: "I distinctly\par                  remember that sometime before I was born I believed".) \par \par                  That expression of doubt has no place in the language-game; but if we cut out\par                  human behavior, which is the expression of sensation, it looks as if I might\par                  legitimately begin to doubt afresh. My temptation to say that one might take a\par                  sensation for something other than what it is arises from this: if I assume the\par                  abrogation of the normal language-game with the expression of a sensation. I need\par                  a criterion of identity for the sensation; and then the possibility of error also\par                  exists.\par           289.\par                  "When I say 'I am in pain' I am at any rate justified before myself." -- What does\par                  that mean? Does it mean: "If someone else could know what I am calling 'pain', he\par                  would admit that I was using the word correctly"? \par \par                  To use a word without a justification does not mean to use it without right.\par           290.\par                  What I do is not, o course2 to identify my sensation by criteria: but to repeat an\par                  expression. But this is not the end of the language-game: it is the beginning. \par \par                  But isn't the beginning the sensation -- which I describe? -- Perhaps this word\par                  "describe" tricks us here. I say "I describe my state of mind" and "I describe my\par                  room". You need to call to mind the differences between the language-games.\par           291.\par                  What we call "descriptions" are instruments for particular uses. Think of a machine\par                  -- drawing, a cross -- section. an elevation with v measurements, which an engineer\par                  has before him. Thinking of a description as a word -- picture of the facts has\par                  something misleading about it: one tends to think only of such pictures as hang on\par                  our walls: which seem simply to portray how a thing looks, what it is like. (These\par                  pictures are as it were idle.)\par           292.\par                  Don't always think that you read off what you say from the facts; that you portray\par                  these in words according to rules. For even so you would have to apply the rule in\par                  the particular case without guidance.\par           293.\par                  If I say of myself that it is only from my own case that I know what the word "pain"\par                  means -- must I not say the same of other people too? And how can I generalize\par                  the one case so irresponsibly? \par \par                  Now someone tells me that he knows what pain is only from his own case!\par                  Suppose everyone had a box with something in it: we call it a "beetle". No one can\par                  look into anyone else's box, and everyone says he knows what a beetle is only by\par                  looking at his beetle. -- Here it would be quite possible for everyone to have\par                  something different in his box. One might even imagine such a thing constantly\par                  changing. -- But suppose the word "beetle" had a use in these people's language?\par                  -- If so it would not be used as the name of a thing. The thing in the box has no\par                  place in the language-game at all; not even as a something: for the box might\par                  even be empty. -- No, one can 'divide through' by the thing in the box; it cancels\par                  out, whatever it is. \par \par                  That is to say: if we construe the grammar of the expression of sensation on the\par                  model of 'object and designation' the object droops out of consideration as\par                  irrelevant.\par           294.\par                  If you say he sees a private picture before him, which he is describing, you have\par                  still made an assumption about what he has before him. And that means that you\par                  can describe it or do describe it more closely. If you admit that you haven't any\par                  notion what kind of thing it might be that he has before him -- then what leads you\par                  into saying, in spite of that, that he has something before him? Isn't it as if I were\par                  to say of someone: "He has something. But I don't know whether it is money, or\par                  debts, or an empty till."\par           295.\par                  "I know .... only from my own case" -- what kind of proposition is this meant to be\par                  at all? An experiential one? No. -- A grammatical one? \par \par                  Suppose everyone does say about himself that he knows what pain is only from his\par                  own pain. -- Not that people really say that, or are even prepared to say it. But if\par                  everybody said it -- it might be a kind of exclamation. And even if it gives no\par                  information, still it is a picture, and why should we not want to call up such a\par                  picture? Imagine an allegorical painting take the place of those words. \par \par                  When we look into ourselves as we do philosophy, we often get to see just such a\par                  picture. A full -- blown pictorial representation of our grammar. Not facts; but as it\par                  were illustrated turns of speech.\par           296.\par                  "Yes, but there is something there all the same accompanying my cry of pain. And\par                  it is on account of that that I utter it. And this something is what is important -- and\par                  frightful." -- Only whom are we informing of this? And on what occasion?\par           297.\par                  Of course, if water boils in a pot, steam comes out of the pot and also pictured\par                  steam comes out of the pictured pot. But what if one insisted on saying that there\par                  must also be something boiling in the picture of the pot?\par           298.\par                  The very fact that we should so much like to say: "This is the important thing" --\par                  while we point privately to the sensation -- is enough to show how much we are\par                  inclined to say something which gives no information.\par           299.\par                  Being unable -- when we surrender ourselves to philosophical thought -- to help\par                  saying such-and-such; being irresistibly inclined to say it -- does not mean being\par                  forced into an assumption, or having an immediate perception or knowledge of a\par                  state of affairs.\par           300.\par                  It is -- we should like to say -- not merely the picture of the behavior that plays a\par                  part in the language-game with the words "he is in pain", but also the picture of the\par                  pain. Or, not merely the paradigm of the behavior, but also that of the pain. -- It is\par                  a misunderstanding to say "The picture of pain enters into the language-game with\par                  the word 'pain'." The image of pain is not a picture and this image is not\par                  replaceable in the language-game by anything that we should call a picture. -- The\par                  image of pain certainly enters into the language game in a sense; only not as a\par                  picture.\par           301.\par                  An image is not a picture, but a picture can correspond to it.\par           302.\par                  If one has to imagine someone else's pain on the model of one's own, this is none\par                  too easy a thing to do: for I have to imagine pain which I do not feel on the model\par                  of the pain which I do feel. That is, what I have to do is not simply to make a\par                  transition in imagination from one place of pain to another. As, from pain in the\par                  hand to pain in the arm. For I am not to imagine that I feel pain in some region of\par                  his body. (Which would also be possible.) \par \par                  Pain -- behavior can point to a painful place -- but the subject of pain is the person\par                  who gives it expression.\par           303.\par                  "I can only believe that someone else is in pain, but I know' it if I am." -- Yes: one\par                  can make the decision to say "I believe he is in pain" instead of "He is in pain". But\par                  that is all. What looks like an explanation here, or like a statement about a mental\par                  process, is in truth an exchange of one expression for another which, while we are\par                  doing philosophy, seems the more appropriate one. \par \par                  Just try -- in a real case -- to doubt someone else's fear or pain. \par           304.\par                  "But you will surely admit that there is a difference between pain -- behavior\par                  accompanied by pain and pain -- behavior without any pain?" -- Admit it? What\par                  greater difference could there be? -- "And yet you again and again reach the\par                  conclusion that the sensation itself is a nothing." -- Not at all. It is not a\par                  something, but not a nothing either! The conclusion was only that a nothing\par                  would serve just as well as a something about which nothing could be said. We\par                  have only rejected the grammar which tries to force itself on us here. \par \par                  The paradox disappears only if we make a radical break with the idea that\par                  language always functions in one way, always serves the same purpose: to convey\par                  thoughts -- which may be about houses, pains, and evil, or anything else you\par                  please.\par           305.\par                  "But you surely cannot deny that, for example, in remembering, an inner process\par                  takes place." -- What gives the impression that we want to deny anything? When\par                  one says "Still, an inner process does take place here" -- one wants to go on:\par                  "After all, you see it." And it is this inner process that one means by the word\par                  "remembering". -- The impression that we wanted to deny something arises from\par                  our setting our faces against the picture of the 'inner process'. What we deny is\par                  that the picture of the inner process gives us the correct idea of the use of the\par                  word "to remember". We say that this picture with its ramifications stands in the\par                  way of our seeing the use of the word as it is.\par           306.\par                  Why should I deny that there is a mental process? But "There has just taken place\par                  in me the mental process of remembering...." means nothing more than: "I have just\par                  remembered ....". To deny the mental process would mean to deny the\par                  remembering; to deny that anyone ever remembers anything.\par           307.\par                  "Are you not really a behaviorist in disguise? Aren't you at bottom really saying\par                  that everything except human behavior is a fiction?" -- If I do speak of a fiction,\par                  then it is of a grammatical fiction.\par           308.\par                  How does the philosophical problem about mental processes and states and about\par                  behaviorism arise? The first step is the one that altogether escapes notice. We\par                  talk of processes and states and leave their nature undecided. Sometime perhaps\par                  we shall know more about them -- we think. But that is just what commits us to a\par                  particular way of looking at the matter. For we have a definite concept of what it\par                  means to learn to know a process better. (The decisive movement in the conjuring\par                  trick has been made, and it was the very one that we thought quite innocent.) --\par                  And now the analogy which was to make us understand our thoughts falls to\par                  pieces. So we have to deny the yet uncomprehended process in the yet\par                  unexplored medium. And now it looks as if we had denied mental processes. And\par                  naturally we don't want to deny them.\par           309.\par                  What is your aim in philosophy? -- To show the fly the way out of the fly-bottle.\par            \par \par \par }